

======================
Changes In Version 4.0
======================

Working version of mod_wsgi 4.0 can currently only be obtained by checking
it out from the source code repository. The Mercurial command you should
use is:

::

    hg clone http://modwsgi.googlecode.com/hg/ mod_wsgi-4.X


Note that mod_wsgi 4.0 was originally derived from mod_wsgi 3.1. It has
though all changes from later releases in the 3.X branch. Thus also see:

1. Changes in version [ChangesInVersion0302 3.2] of mod_wsgi.

2. Changes in version [ChangesInVersion0303 3.3] of mod_wsgi.

3. Changes in version [ChangesInVersion0304 3.4] of mod_wsgi.

Bugs Fixed
----------

1. If a UNIX signal received by daemon mode process while still being
initialised to signal that it should be shutdown, the process could crash
rather than shutdown properly due to not registering the signal pipe
prior to registering signal handler.

2. Python doesn't initialise codes in sub interpreters automatically which
in some cases could cause code running in WSGI script to fail due to lack
of encoding for Unicode strings when converting them. The error message
in this case was:

  LookupError: no codec search functions registered: can't find encoding

The 'ascii' encoding is now forcibly loaded when initialising sub interpreters
to get Python to initialise codecs.

Features Removed
----------------

1. No longer support the use of mod_python in conjunction with mod_wsgi.
When this is attempted an error is forced and Apache will not be able to
start. An error message is logged in main Apache error log.

2. No longer support the use of Apache 1.3. Minimum requirement is now
Apache 2.0.

Features Changed
----------------

1. Use of kernel sendfile() function by wsgi.file_wrapper is now off by
default. This was originally always on for embedded mode and completely
disabled for daemon mode. Use of this feature can be enabled for either
mode using WSGIEnableSendfile directive, setting it to On to enable it.

The default is now off because kernel sendfile() is not always able to work
on all file objects. Some instances where it will not work are described
for the Apache EnableSendfile directive.

  http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/mod/core.html#enablesendfile

Although Apache has use of sendfile() enabled by default for static files,
they are moving to having it off by default in future version of Apache.
This change is being made because of the problems which arise and users not
knowing how to debug it and solve it.

Thus also erring on side of caution and having it off by default but
allowing more knowledgeable users to enable it where they know always using
file objects which will work with sendfile().

2. The HTTPS variable is no longer set within the WSGI environment. The
authoritative indicator of whether a SSL connection is used is
wsgi.url_scheme and a WSGI compliant application should check for
wsgi.url_scheme. The only reason that HTTPS was supplied at all was because
early Django versions supporting WSGI interface weren't correctly using
wsgi.url_scheme. Instead they were expecting to see HTTPS to exist.

This change will cause non conformant WSGI applications to finally break.
This possibly includes some Django versions prior to Django version 1.0.

Note that you can still set HTTPS in Apache configuration using the SetEnv
or SetEnvIf directive, or via a rewrite rule. In that case, that will
override what wsgi.url_scheme is set to and once wsgi.url_scheme is set
appropriately, the HTTPS variable will be removed from the set of variables
passed through to the WSGI environment.

3. The wsgi.version variable has been reverted to 1.0 to conform to the
WSGI PEP 3333 specification. It was originally set to 1.1 on expectation
that revised specification would use 1.1 but that didn't come to be.

New Features
------------

1. Add supplementary-groups option to WSGIDaemonProcess to allow group
membership to be overridden and specified comma separate list of groups
used instead.

2. Add a graceful-timeout option to WSGIDaemonProcess. This option is
applied in a number of circumstances.

When maximum-requests and this option are used together, when maximum
requests is reached, rather than immediately shutdown, potentially
interupting active requests if they don't finished with shutdown timeout,
can specify a separate graceful shutdown period. If the all requests are
completed within this time frame then will shutdown immediately, otherwise
normal forced shutdown kicks in. In some respects this is just allowing a
separate shutdown timeout on cases where requests could be interrupted and
could avoid it if possible.

When cpu-time-limit and this option are used together, when CPU time limit
reached, rather than immediately shutdown, potentially interupting active
requests if they don't finished with shutdown timeout, can specify a
separate graceful shutdown period.

3. Add potentially graceful process restart option for daemon processes
when sent a graceful restart signal. Signal is usually SIGUSR1 but is
platform dependent as using same signal as Apache would use. If the
graceful-timeout option had been provided to WSGIDaemonProcess, then the
process will attempt graceful shutdown first based on the that timeout,
otherwise normal shutdown procedure used as if received a SIGTERM.

4. Add 'memory-limit' option to WSGIDaemonProcess to allow memory usage of
daemon processes to be restricted. This will have no affect on some
platforms as RLIMIT_AS/RLIMIT_DATA with setrlimit() isn't always
implemented. For example MacOS X and older Linux kernel versions do not
implement this feature. You will need to test whether this feature works
or not before depending on it.

5. Add 'virtual-memory-limit' option to WSGIDaemonProcess to allow virtual
memory usage of daemon processes to be restricted. This will have no affect
on some platforms as RLIMIT_VMEM with setrlimit() isn't always implemented.
You will need to test whether this feature works or not before depending on
it.

6. Access, authentication and authorisation hooks now have additional keys
in the environ dictionary for 'mod_ssl.is_https' and 'mod_ssl.var_lookup'.
These equate to callable functions provided by mod_ssl for determining if
the client connection to Apache used SSL and what the values of variables
specified in the SSL certifcates, server or client, are. These are only
available if Apache 2.0 or later is being used.

7. For Python 2.6 and above, the WSGIDontWriteBytecode directive can be used
at global scope in Apache configuration to disable writing of all byte code
files, ie., .pyc, by the Python interpreter when it imports Python code files.
To disable writing of byte code files, set directive to 'On'.

Note that this doesn't prevent existing byte code files on disk being used
in preference to the corresponding Python code files. Thus you should first
remove .pyc files from web application directories if relying on this
option to ensure that .py file is always used.
