#summary Software available for download.

= Nothing In Life Is Free =

A significant amount of time and effort has gone into producing this
software, the documentation and in providing support to users. So, although
you are free to download it and do with it as you wish, it is not free from
cost.

If you are using mod_wsgi, please consider making a
[HowToContributeBack donation]. By giving a donation you help to ensure
that mod_wsgi will continue to be developed and the documentation further
improved.

If you are philosophically against the idea of contributing back to Open
Source projects in a monetary way and find it obnoxious that any Open
Source project would solicit donations, then it is suggested that you use
one of the alternatives to mod_wsgi such as
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Gateway_Interface CGI].

= Source Code Downloads =

The most up to date and recommended version of mod_wsgi is 3.3.

  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/detail?name=mod_wsgi-3.3.tar.gz mod_wsgi-3.3.tar.gz - Source Code]

For a list of changes made in this version see:

  * [ChangesInVersion0303 Changes In Version 3.3]

For a list of changes in all versions of mod_wsgi see:

  * [ChangesInAllVersions Changes In All Versions]

For details on how to install from the source code see:

  * [QuickInstallationGuide Quick Installation Guide]

= Windows Binary Downloads =

Variations of precompiled binaries currently available for Windows are as
follows. You need to make sure you select the correct one for the version
of Python and Apache that is being used:

  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/detail?name=mod_wsgi-win32-ap22py26-3.3.so mod_wsgi-win32-ap22py26-3.3.so - Apache 2.2 / Python 2.6]
  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/detail?name=mod_wsgi-win32-ap22py27-3.3.so mod_wsgi-win32-ap22py27-3.3.so - Apache 2.2 / Python 2.7]

For details on how to install these files see:

  * [InstallationOnWindows Installation On Windows]

Note that these binaries will only work for 32 bit Python and 32 bit Apache.
If you need to use 64 bit Python and 64 bit Apache and can't compile mod_wsgi
yourself from source code, you may look at the Windows binaries available
for [http://code.activestate.com/pypm/modwsgi-apache2.2/ ActivateState Python].
It is presumed that you have to be using ActivateState Python installation
for them to work. It is not known where you would however get 64 bit Apache
from as believe ASF only provides a 32 bit installer.

= MacOS X Binary Downloads =

A precompiled binary is currently supplied for MacOS X 10.6 (Snow Leopard).
This is specifically for the Apple supplied Apache 2.2.X and Python 2.6.X
and should not be used with MacPort or fink Apache/Python packages, or self
compiled Apache/Python packages.

  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/detail?name=mod_wsgi-macosx106-ap22py26-3.3.so mod_wsgi-macosx106-ap22py26-3.3.so - Apache 2.2 / Python 2.6]

= Conference Presentations =

The following presentations are also available.

  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/detail?name=mod_wsgi-pycon-sydney-2010.pdf PyCon Conference Slides - Sydney 2010]
  * [http://pyconau.blip.tv/file/3840484/ PyCon Conference Video - Sydney 2010]

= Other Available Downloads =

For additional downloads see:

  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/list List Of Current Downloads]
  * [http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/downloads/list?can=1&q=&colspec=Filename+Summary+Uploaded+Size+DownloadCount List All Available Downloads]
